All right so the next thing we're gonna
do is we're gonna talk about recent
things that have landed in TypeScript.
So I begin a lot of the TypeScript
courses that we have on the Frontend
masters platform with a quick update
to what's new to the language.
Aside from TypeScript fundamentals and
intermediate TypeScript,
those courses kind of start
at the very beginning.
It's good to be able to stay up
to date and I want you to know,
kind of what are the things
you should care about?
What are the things that impact you as
a programmer that have landed recently.
So, this represents stuff that
has landed since the 4.0 release.
And why have I chosen that
is sort of where we begin,
It's really where the expressiveness of
types, has become a lot more powerful.
It's worlds different using TypeScript
today, than even a year ago,
there are things that couldn't be done,
which are now possible.
And we're going to talk about
these topics here in this list.
These are six things of the 30 or so
things that have landed in the language,
six select things that I think will make a
difference to the way you write your code.
A lot of the stuff in
the release notes you might not.
Don't care about you little fixes to
the compiler performance improvements
everybody likes those I don't need to
tell you that performance is better that
doesn't change the way
you write your code.
So the first thing we'll talk about
here is variadic tupple types so
it's a huge deal.
So first, as is sometimes the case,
in the TypeScript world,
we have this complicated terminology.
It's a little bit scary.
What does variadic tupple type even mean?
Why should you care about it?
And I promise we'll answer that question
by the end of this little section here.
So, I want to work our way up to
understanding what's the type,
what's the tableau?
What were the limitations?
What can we do now that's different and
why does that matter to you?
That's kind of our order
of operations here.
So, first, if you've never worked with
tableau types before, they're great.
They're kind of think of them almost
like a fixed length array where we
know the type at any given position.
So instead of having
an arbitrary array of numbers,
we could have a tupple of length
three that represents a color,
each being an eight bit number, so
like 00255, that could be red, right?
And we can pass around this array and
there's sort of a special meaning that
the first position second and third that's
the R, G and B channels respectively.
So we could use an object for
this as well but
sometimes there are advantages
to using tuples instead.
And for a while,
we've been able to use a spread operator
as the last element of the tuple.
So I'm going to set the stage with a more
interesting example here than color,
where a tuple to me makes a lot of sense.
So let's imagine we're running a deli and
we sell a bunch of different
types of sandwiches.
So here's an inn umm for sandwiches.
So these will each be
a number effectively.
Like you can see hamburger equals zero.
Veggie burger equals 1, right?
And then we have a couple type
that represents a sandwich order.
And you can see here in the first
position we have the order total,
in the second position,
we have the sandwich and let's pretend.
And at this deli,
you can only order one sandwich at a time.
Just to make my contrived example work.
[LAUGH] So you can have one
sandwich followed by an arbitrary
number of toppings, and
that's a string array.
So this tuples going to look like,
number, and
then a sandwich and
then any number of strings could follow.
So if we were to create
a couple orders here,
we've got one that's a hamburger
with lettuce and a 1299.
And then we've got a second one and
you can see like the price is a little
different maybe we're like up charging
because we're using avocado here, but
you can see we can have multiple strings.
And if we look at this you can
see in the tooltip This is
a tuple it does not necessarily
have fixed length, but
there is some understanding we have about
the types at each position in the tuple.
And you can see, like type checking
works the way we would hope it does.
If we forget the sandwich as
we have in this last example,
we can see that type checking tells us
hey, I didn't expect to find lettuce here.
So this is,
this is an example we'll be using,
as we understand more about
variadic tupple type.
And the key here, the thing you
probably have not done before is this
having a rest or a spread element
as that last thing in the tuple.
It has been possible but
an unusual to use it.
So it's even possible to
use this in a generic way.
And if we look at this,
you can see I've got this type T and
I can have a number followed by any number
of T's that I care to put in there.
And so here you can see like we've got
the string case and the Boolean case.
The important thing is you have to
use at least before TypeScript for
before these variadic tupple types.
You absolutely had to use T
as the member of the array.
And then you had to say, we've got dot,
dot, dot and an array of T's.
This is where we encounter a problem.
So let me show you what you
would have gotten if you
tried to do something different.
Let's say we wanted to do this
a different way, instead of saying,
I have a member, membertype, and
here's an array of those members.
What if we wanted to say
T is an arrayish thing.
And I want to do ...T instead,
in TypeScript three,
you would have gotten this error.
It would have said and by the way this is
a terrible error message a rest element
type must be an array type and over here
like this looks like an array type to me.
This is in fact any array, right?
So this has been fixed but
Let's talk about why this
matters why should you care.
It seems like we've drilled way down we
found this little like exotic specific
failing case why should you care so
returning to our sandwich order.
We've created an order here
hamburger with lettuce and
let's say that we have a function we
use to pass our order to the kitchen.
And the kitchen does not care about how
much this costs they just care about what
is the sandwich, what are the toppings
I need to put on the sandwich?
So let's say we have a function that is
meant to get the tail of the array and
if you've done any functional
programming before.
Tail is probably something
that you're familiar with,
it just all we're doing is
we're taking an array in and
this allows us to do this with
read only arrays as well.
So, if you're using immutable
data structures of some kinda,
this would also work and you can see here,
the first thing's a number.
We have an array of Ts following that.
We can kind of chop off this
first thing and ignore it.
Get everything else in the array and
return that everything else.
So effectively we're like chopping off the
first thing giving you everything else and
look at what we get.
I would argue that in this situation,
we have lost information.
We get instead of a nice tupple type,
we get an array type that says.
This is a shuffled mix of maybe some
sandwiches maybe some toppings.
My argument here is,
we have lost information, right.
So if I give you a deck of cards and
I say there are four aces on top.
Here you go compared to like just mixing
them up down here and handing them to you,
you know less about that second
deck of cards that I shuffled.
So this is less information,
it's less specific.
Where this trouble happens is it has
to do with this thing here, right?
This is where we're saying.
I need I have this type t,
an array of ts, right?
And I need to match that with this.
And when this inference happens this could
be a mixed array of any length, right?
So when we say like, we compare these two
things and the left and the right and
we say, what is T?
Well, it could be either of these things.
This is where things break down and
where yeah,
this isn't a valid answer to the question,
but we lost information in doing this.
So like, here's another example
it simplifies things even
further this function here all it
does is return the array you give it.
But in doing the same kind of
inference Is where we pass
in this array or this topple,
so it comes in here.
And we return the same thing
you can see in the tooltip,
that T is being regarded as sandwich or
topic, right?
Hamburger or lettuce.
So that's where the problem is happening.
That's where we're making
that type equivalence check.
What we want instead is
something like this.
So here, we're going to our different
scenario where we're saying,
I have an arrayish thing Type T
is some type of tupple or array,
some ordered collection of some sort.
And I want to infer T,
not an array of Ts, T.
Things work out much better for us here.
You can see it's a very similar function.
It's literally the same
implementation here, right?
We've got just return arg.
But just the way we've expressed, is the
type the array or is the type the member.
That makes a huge difference for
us here, we don't lose information now.
And this is the small change that
we can make to this tail function.
So, we have been able to
do this the whole time.
This was possible in TypeScript three
on a function, but not on tuples.
So now, we can do this,
where we go from this is T,
I'm taking an array of them
to this is an arrayish thing.
Infer what that thing is,
that's happening over here.
And now, we get the same nice result out.
So this means that when the kitchen gets
the order, when we chop off that 1299,
now we've got, here's the sandwich, here
are all the toppings that come off of it.
So why does this matter?
I've given you one example and we can see
in the tooltips we get a different result.
If using everyday TypeScript
code where might you see this?
Arguments, function arguments
types are often going
through the type system as tuples.
So, if you're trying to get like the
arguments of a particular constructor or
something like that this is where you
would have gotten kind of a jumble
of things.
Whereas now you've kind of preserved
the order if there's a rest element at
the end,
you'll get the correct type for that.
And you may not be creating types
like this in your own code but
libraries you use might be
sort of feeding them to you.
And this will have an impact on what
works in your code and what doesn't and
your ability to catch bugs
before they hit production.
So this is one of those lower level
things seems like a subtle fix,
but it has pretty massive ramifications.
Another thing that you can do
is multiple spreads in tuples.
So that's part of this feature set.
And we have greater flexibility
around Rest elements.
So this is something that
you don't often see but
it's possible, you could say I
have a tuple that's a Boolean.
And then any amount of numbers you like
but it must be followed by a string.
So hopefully, this kind of explains
why you think about this type.
We think about these as fixed length
things where it's just number,
number string,
something very simple like that.
But there's a lot of flexibility here and
this opens some major
new doors in terms of how we can
express things in type script.
So, as a practical example,
to connect this further back to reality,
who has used RX JS before or heard of it?
Okay, a couple people.
So the idea behind RX js is there
are these things called observables.
You can think of these as like
little beacons that emit events,
almost like a promise that
could resolve more than once.
Where every time you move your mouse or
every time you click a button,
this thing fires and you create a chain
of things that attach to an observable.
And that's usually where you'll
respond to these kinds of events.
So I told you that function
arguments are where you can see this
tupple type in action.
Here is a pull request
showing the back flips that,
that the RX JS folks had
to do in order to deal with
the limitation of not having
these variadic tupple types.
You can see they basically had
a separate type signature for
the one argument, the two argument,
the three arguments for argument five.
All the way to the sixth argument
flavor of this function and
they're able to replace that
with a couple things right.
We no longer have like T one through
six we can just say look now that
the tupple works the way
I would hope it does
If we can shrink all this
way down we can simplify.
So even if you aren't writing this code,
this is gonna be much faster much
less confusing when you see those
little tool tips pop up like
you don't have to now look at.
That this tooltip says there
are 17 different options for
calling merge like You're
looking at 3 of 17 and
you're sort of clicking through to
figure out which one you should use.
Now, everything can be more
concisely represented into a fewer
number of signatures
that kind of just work.
So your documentation is gonna be
better t things will be simpler and
easier to read and understand.
And you can see like they're still
working on cleaning these up but
you can see elsewhere, all of these
places where they've got T T2 T 3 T4 T5.
That's the code being removed and
what's added is,
these tupple types with this
spread operators because they
that now we'll grab the information
the way it should have worked.